--- SELECTED SECTION: MODULE-LATTICE-BASED KEY-ENCAPSULATION MECHANISM (lines 1475-1531, score 125.1) ---
mechanism using the so-called Fujisaki-Okamoto (FO) transform [11, 12]. Due to certain properties of the FO transform, the resulting KEM provides security in a significantly more general
attack model than the PKE scheme. As a result, ML-KEM is believed to satisfy so-called IND-CCA2
security [1, 4, 13, 14].
13


FIPS 203

MODULE-LATTICE-BASED KEY-ENCAPSULATION MECHANISM

The specification of the ML-KEM algorithms in this standard will follow the same pattern. Specifically, this standard will first describe a public-key encryption scheme called K-PKE (in Section 5)
and then use the algorithms of K-PKE as subroutines when describing the algorithms of ML-KEM
(in Sections 6 and 7). The cryptographic transformation from K-PKE to ML-KEM is crucial for
achieving IND-CCA2 security. The scheme K-PKE is not IND-CCA2-secure and shall not be used as
a stand-alone scheme (see Section 3.3).
A notable feature of ML-KEM is the use of the number-theoretic transform (NTT). The NTT
̂ linear polynomials.
converts a polynomial 𝑓  in  𝑅𝑞 to an alternative representation as a vector 𝑓 of
Working with NTT representations enables significantly faster multiplication of polynomials.
Other operations (e.g., addition, rounding, and sampling) can be done in either representation.
ML-KEM satisfies the essential KEM property of correctness. This means that in the absence
of corruption or interference, the process in Figure 1 will result in 𝐾 ′ = 𝐾 with overwhelming
probability. ML-KEM also comes with a proof of asymptotic theoretical security in a certain
heuristic model [4]. Each of the parameter sets of ML-KEM comes with an associated security
strength that was estimated based on current cryptanalysis (see Section 8 for details).
Parameter sets and algorithms. Recall that a KEM consists of algorithms KeyGen, Encaps, and
Decaps, along with a collection of parameter sets. In the case of ML-KEM, the three aforementioned algorithms are:
1. ML-KEM.KeyGen (Algorithm 19)
2. ML-KEM.Encaps (Algorithm 20)
3. ML-KEM.Decaps (Algorithm 21)
These algorithms are described and discussed in detail in Section 7.
ML-KEM comes equipped with three parameter sets:
- ML-KEM-512 (security category 1)
- ML-KEM-768 (security category 3)
- ML-KEM-1024 (security category 5)
These parameter sets are described and discussed in detail in Section 8. The security categories
1-5 are defined in SP 800-57, Part 1 [7]. Each parameter set assigns a particular numerical value
to five integer variables: 𝑘, 𝜂1 , 𝜂2 , 𝑑𝑢 , and 𝑑𝑣 . The values of these variables in each parameter
set are given in Table 2 of Section 8. In addition to these five variable parameters, there are also
two constants: 𝑛 = 256 and 𝑞 = 3329.
Decapsulation failures. Provided that all inputs are well-formed and randomness generation is
successful, the key establishment procedure of ML-KEM will never explicitly fail, meaning that
both ML-KEM.Encaps and ML-KEM.Decaps will each output a 256-bit value. Moreover, if no
corruption or interference is present, the two 256-bit values produced by ML-KEM.Encaps and
ML-KEM.Decaps will be equal with overwhelming probability (i.e., 𝐾 ′ will equal 𝐾 in the process
described in Figure 1). The event that 𝐾 ′ != 𝐾 under these conditions is called a decapsulation
14


FIPS 203

MODULE-LATTICE-BASED KEY-ENCAPSULATION MECHANISM

failure. Formally, the decapsulation failure probability is defined to be the probability (conditioned
on no RGB failures) that the process
1. (ek, dk) <- ML-KEM.KeyGen()
2. (𝑐, 𝐾) <- ML-KEM.Encaps(ek)

--- SELECTED SECTION: MODULE-LATTICE-BASED KEY-ENCAPSULATION MECHANISM (lines 1570-1617, score 101.6) ---
may only be used as subroutines in the algorithms of ML-KEM. In particular, the algorithms
K-PKE.KeyGen (Algorithm 13), K-PKE.Encrypt (Algorithm 14), and K-PKE.Decrypt (Algorithm 15)
are not approved for use as a public-key encryption scheme.
15


FIPS 203

MODULE-LATTICE-BASED KEY-ENCAPSULATION MECHANISM

Controlled access to internal functions. The key-encapsulation mechanism ML-KEM makes use
of internal, “derandomized” functions ML-KEM.KeyGen_internal, ML-KEM.Encaps_internal, and
ML-KEM.Decaps_internal, specified in Section 6. The interfaces for these functions should not
be made available to applications other than for testing purposes. In particular, the sampling of
random values required for key generation (as specified in ML-KEM.KeyGen) and encapsulation
(as specified in ML-KEM.Encaps) shall be performed by the cryptographic module.
Equivalent implementations. For every algorithm that is specified in this standard, a conforming
implementation may replace the given set of steps with any mathematically equivalent set of
steps. In other words, the specified algorithm may be replaced with a different procedure that
produces the correct output for every input (where “input” includes the specified input as well
as all parameter values and all randomness).
Approved usage of the shared secret key. If randomness generation is successful, the values
𝐾 and 𝐾 ′ returned by ML-KEM.Encaps and ML-KEM.Decaps, respectively, are always 256-bit
values. Under appropriate conditions (see Sections 3.1 and 3.2, and SP 800-227 [1]), these values
match (i.e., 𝐾 ′ = 𝐾) and can be used directly as a shared secret key for symmetric cryptography.
If further key derivation is needed, the final symmetric keys shall be derived from this 256-bit
shared secret key in an approved manner, as specified in SP 800-108 and SP 800-56C [16, 17].
As discussed in Section 3.2, ML-KEM is an IND-CCA2-secure KEM. However, a combined KEM
that includes ML-KEM as a component might not meet IND-CCA2 security. Implementers should
assess the security of any procedure in which the key derivation methods of SP 800-56C are
applied to ML-KEM in combination with another key establishment procedure. More guidance
regarding combined KEMs is given in SP 800-227 [1].
Randomness generation. Two algorithms in this standard require the generation of randomness
as an internal step: ML-KEM.KeyGen and ML-KEM.Encaps. In pseudocode, this randomness
$
generation is denoted by a statement of the form 𝑚 <-- 𝔹32 . A fresh string of random bytes
must be generated for every such invocation. These random bytes shall be generated using an
approved RBG, as prescribed in SP 800-90A, SP 800-90B, and SP 800-90C [18, 19, 20]. Moreover,
this RBG shall have a security strength of at least 128 bits for ML-KEM-512, at least 192 bits for
ML-KEM-768, and at least 256 bits for ML-KEM-1024.
Input checking. The algorithms ML-KEM.Encaps and ML-KEM.Decaps require input checking.
Implementers shall ensure that ML-KEM.Encaps and ML-KEM.Decaps are only executed on
inputs that have been checked, as described in Section 7.
Destruction of intermediate values. Data used in intermediate computation steps of KEM
algorithms could be used by an adversary to compromise security. Therefore, implementers
shall ensure that intermediate data is destroyed as soon as it is no longer needed. In particular,
for ML-KEM.KeyGen, ML-KEM.Encaps, and ML-KEM.Decaps, only the designated output can be
retained in memory after the algorithm terminates. All other data shall be destroyed prior to

--- SELECTED SECTION: Appendix C - Differences From the CRYSTALS-Kyber Submission (lines 3638-3684, score 99.7) ---
46


FIPS 203

MODULE-LATTICE-BASED KEY-ENCAPSULATION MECHANISM

Appendix C - Differences From the CRYSTALS-Kyber Submission
This appendix lists the differences between CRYSTALS-KYBER (as described in [4]) and the ML-KEM
scheme (specified in this document) that result in differing input-output behavior of the main
algorithms (i.e., KeyGen, Encaps, Decaps). Since a conforming implementation need only match
the input-output behavior of these three algorithms (see “Implementations” and Section 3.3
below), the list does not include any of the numerous differences in how the main algorithms actually produce outputs from inputs (e.g., via different computational steps or different subroutines),
nor any differences in presentation between this standard and [4].

C.1 Differences Between CRYSTALS-Kyber and FIPS 203 Initial Public Draft
- In the third-round specification [4], the shared secret key was treated as a variable-length
value whose length depended on how it would be used in the relevant application. In this
specification, the length of the shared secret key is fixed to 256 bits. It can be used directly
in applications as a symmetric key, or symmetric keys can be derived from it, as specified
in Section 3.3.
- The ML-KEM.Encaps and ML-KEM.Decaps algorithms in this specification use a different
variant of the Fujisaki-Okamoto transform (see [24, 25]) than the third-round specification [4]. Specifically, ML-KEM.Encaps no longer includes a hash of the ciphertext in the
derivation of the shared secret, and ML-KEM.Decaps has been adjusted to match this
change.
- In the third-round specification [4], the initial randomness 𝑚 in the ML-KEM.Encaps algorithm was first hashed before being used. Specifically, between lines 1 and 2 in Algorithm
20, there was an additional step that performed the operation 𝑚 <- 𝐻(𝑚). The purpose
of this step was to safeguard against the use of flawed randomness generation processes.
As this standard requires the use of NIST-approved randomness generation, this step is
unnecessary and is not performed in ML-KEM.
- This specification includes explicit input checking steps that were not part of the third-round
specification [4]. For example, ML-KEM.Encaps requires that the byte array containing the
encapsulation key correctly decodes to an array of integers modulo 𝑞 without any modular
reductions.

C.2 Changes From FIPS 203 Initial Public Draft
The differences between CRYSTALS-KYBER and ML-KEM as described in Appendix C were included
in the initial public draft (ipd) of FIPS 203, which was posted on August 24, 2023. Based on
comments submitted on the draft ML-KEM, domain separation was added to K-PKE.KeyGen to
prevent the misuse of keys generated to target one security level from being used for a different
security level when saving a key as a seed.
Additionally, FIPS 203 ipd had inadvertently swapped the indices of matrix 𝐀̂ in K-PKE.KeyGen and
K-PKE.Encrypt. This was changed back in the final version of ML-KEM to match CRYSTALS-KYBER.
47
